<UNKNOWN>
Miguelangel Vara
Anthropology 1020
Professor Graham
3/23/2019
        Is there a line that is drawn in the sand between culture and science? Should there be? Science and culture do not always go hand-in-hand, either in a neutral or a hostile manner. There has been growth in the field of science since the Renaissance both in what is discovered and its allowed residence into a majority of the overall collective mind. Though many concepts of science have been accepted, there are still some that are up for debate as to whether or not they have validity. Science and culture are both singular groups, but they each have clashes within the walls of each side. Each of the groups are anything but one body at the moment, but there is a slow but steady progression toward joining forces as a singular community.


Ethics and evolution. These concepts that surround three topics have been greatly fought over for years, but specifically with religious entities. Up until the Renaissance, the masses had followed a great deal of faith-based understandings. With cause and effect being under much speculation and tested by various people throughout time (Darwin, Wallace, Mendel, etc.), there has been some readjustment as to what is understood to be the origin of each thing in existence. Even now, there are still debates as to which side is correct in what exactly made the Universe come into existence, or even the location of planets and stars in accordance with Earth.


Around fourth-century BC, Aristotle had begun teaching that Earth was the center of Everything by explaining that “the sun and planets existed in a series of concentric spheres that revolved around the earth.” (EoPA, pg. 28) Albeit, even though it was taught so early, such a teaching was somewhat solidified in society until Copernicus had challenged his works 1500 years later. Though Copernicus had challenged this, his information came out further down the line than it had from “scholars in India”, but much like Edison, he took much of the credit. Though his “theory was discussed in intellectual circles,” it was not liked very much by the Catholic church since they had “wholeheartedly” accepted Aristotle's theory since it was much more human-centric than Copernicus'. Galilei had even worked to backup Copernicus by proving the theory with logic and math, but again the church did not like this. Luckily, instead of being put to death he was put on house-arrest for the remainder of his life (EoPA, pg. 29). During this time, the church had heavy control of the world as a whole, but there was a slow movement towards scientific thinking that would increase thought throughout the Western world.


John Ray had created the major idea of species that we know today, from research on multitudes of organic life types. He categorized species based on creating fertile offspring and considered each group “reproductively isolated”(EoPA, pg. 29), calling the isolated groups species and the class just above them genus. Post-Ray, Carolus Linnaeus had invented specific classes for plants and animals alike, but also added class and order to the categories as well. The combination became the foundation for taxonomy. At the time it was frowned upon to place humans in the animal kingdom as they were thought to be made in the form of God, so he removed humans for a bit, but then he once again added humans under “Homo” and “sapiens” due to the features shared with mammals. Georges-Louis Leclerc had written about a “center of origin” without stating diversity of species over time, but did cover the impact that the environment had on species and the way that they are formed (EoPA, pg. 30) and Erasmus Darwin popularized the concept further with one of his poems. Finally the concept of dynamic adjustment of a species was pondered upon and recorded by Jean-Baptiste Lamarck who theorized that animals would adapt to their environment and would gain/lose parts of their body depending on whether the specified part is needed or not, otherwise known as “the use-disuse theory.”


Despite the efforts of Lamarck, some people who were liberal in their thinking still believed in fixity rather than evolution, but mostly because dynamic development was not discussed much in the beginning since fixity had been taught from the beginning. The people who were just reading the paper or books produced were put on the fence as to whether species can change over time. Since the public had followed fixity more than evolution, due to the claims made by a majority of the scientists of the time, they had a hard time accepting the information given by Charles Darwin's and Alfred Russel Wallace's shared work Natural Selection.


From the time that the discovery of Natural Selection hit headlines to current day, religious institutions have had the issue of believing that humans were descendants of shared ancestors to that of other creatures. This struggle is due to the belief that God had created humans to inherit the Earth as it's masters. Any claim to have descended from another creature rather than God contradicts the origin of humans based on the Bible. With the church, the very institution that represents religion, fighting ideas like Evolution, followers of the church will join in suit to aid the causes that are seen as threats to the existence of their beliefs.


Beyond the tumults between conservative/religious individuals and the followers of this idea, there are people who fight evolution since they thought that meant humans did not come from monkeys. They were rightfully confused, but it was a misconception nonetheless. From that time period to now, there has been a complex that people have against being compared to animals who are not human. Renes Descartes paved the way with these types of thoughts, stating that “animals cannot reason and do not feel pain.” (Animalethics) But this philosopher was the same to make the infamous quote “I think, therefore I am.” These thoughts do not allow for any room for ponderance beyond the lack of autonomy possessed by each creature that is not human. With this philosophical package floating the the back of one's mind, imposed by articles and books written containing this thought process presented implicitly and/or explicitly (then maybe added to the already-preconceived notions that religious institutions had already instilled beforehand), it would be extremely difficult to accept such an idea that we descended from ancestors that we share with such animals. Being compared to that of a brute whom lacks any sort of intellectual or emotional drive along with the scarcity of meaning is enough to push people away from wanting anything to do with science.


Being compared to an animal is not something that is just reserved for evolution, it is something used by people to isolate themselves from another person or group that can not agree on one or more decisions. Abortion for instance, is a more modern argument that has been under much dispute since it does not coincide with religious concepts and is continuously compared to murder. Despite this fight being between humans and their choice, abortion is anything but a species-based action. Some female field-mice have the ability to abort their fetus should they smell the urine of a male mouse other than their current father of the fetus. Some geese have the ability to destroy the fetus that they hold at that time depending on whether she can support the child and herself when the child is born or not. Abortion in this case is not something that is consciously chosen by the female whose body has been committed to this action. Much like any other creature, in humans, something not accounted for is what may or may not be triggered in the human female's brain when she has the thought to abort her child. There is a lack on the scientific aspect of this as much of this is still under speculation and left up to the further thought of people.


Albeit human female abortion has not been openly discussed very much past morality, an underrated and big part of life that is directly affected by this is population size. This discussion is nothing new, as it was greatly explored by Charles Lyell (“He pointed out that in nature, there is a tendency for animal populations to increase in size, but the amount of resources (food and water) remains relatively the same. Therefore, population size is held in check by resource availability.”(EoPA, pg. 32)). Abortion is just one of the ways to keep from overpopulation as well as environmental destruction from all of the pollution created from excess production. On this topic, there are a fears for both sides of this dichotomy. Some claimed-scientific individuals fear overpopulation and less available resources than expected, and conservative/religious individuals fear that the unnatural way of ending or preventing life will lead to an atrocious way of life. Though some liberal individuals fight for abortion, they do not fight the scientific fight, they fight on the basis of autonomy. Both have some worry that there will be a negative impact on society as a whole should the other group get its way.


“Change” can be the trigger word for much concern in many different people, and rightfully so as change alone can destroy or improve everything it touches. The discussion of gender is a modern-day-matter that does not have an easy answer for everyone. Culturally, the people are headed in the direction of choosing their own gender based on what they feel. A preconception of some members in scientifically-claimed-community believe that gender is prescribed from birth and determined by genitalia obtained. But the problem with this concept is that it does not pertain to people with Androgen insensitivity syndrome (AIS), which accounts for approximately “1 in 20,000 people”(Crocetti 2013). AIS causes “Wolffian structures and “male” gonads to form internally” while “”female” genitals and secondary sex characteristics develop externally.” Per this information, gender is still binary, but still not so easily determined upon birth.


Though this is known to some scientists, it is still considered strange to follow the role of a gender separate from the one prescribed from birth (based on genitals), which is known as Gender Dysphoria(Crocetti 2013). In the past, the more common route of thought was believing that transgender peoples had mental issues. But more recently, the culture has moved to a more Liberal point of view and considers being transgender as a way of expressing oneself beyond the believed shackles of being cisgendered. Though this social scrimmage may be publicized between political groups, the science community too has problems with believing that gender can be so loosely altered. Just being able to “change” gender based on feeling, as though the assigned one is not the actual gender, does not physiologically adjust what is occurring in the body. But given that this effort is currently under heavy construction, it is far too soon to make a statement without making a slippery-slope argument. But slippery-slope arguments are made by the two main sides of the culture spectrum, unless claims are made without extreme extrapolation. Some on the conservative side of culture fear that this way of thinking will cause the creation of too many snowflakes, but some on the Liberal side come to believe that it is heartless to confine people to follow this way of forcing people to be something that they did not sign up for.


Much like gender, being born a specific race wasn't chosen by the individual being born. Through the chances ran by random combination of genes, the said person now is stuck with the same color that they were born as, unless there is a skin condition that changes it. Though it is something that isn't chosen by anyone, skin color has been something that will determine how one is treated depending on the time-period and location. In the past, servants were often made of people who were considered to owe or part of the roster to be sold to the people that ruled. North America for instance, African American people were slaves, but not because the slaves themselves owed the slave-owners, but because the country sending them got supplies in return. The common desire during this time was to have children with white skin, but not of Irish decent as they became slaves alongside black individuals. Fast-forwarding to modern- day, it is much more accepted to something other than white, as a sort of “repayment” white individuals are treated as though they don't hold as much say in what suffering means. Science shows that humans are of the same species because they can reproduce and have a fertile offspring regardless of colour. Though this evidence exists, there are still many people who wish to fight for segregation.


Culture, just like Science, is always under some reconstruction since life itself is never completely stagnant. Everything outside of the Human race will continue to change, and people will need to as well if they plan to survive the next step with the rest of the Universe. Taking the next step forward is not always obvious, but it is something to attempt working towards together. But teamwork is not an easy choice between culture and science. Since culture is much more of a collective-thought, it does not always accept the black-and-white view of science. Though there are tumultuous times between the two groups, both work together when there is something that the culture being had can gain something from science.
________________
REFERENCES CITED
* AnimalEthics. (n.d.). Chapter 7: Rene Decartes. Retrieved April 1, 2019, from http://www.animalethics.org.uk/descartes.html
* Crocetti, D. (2013). Genes and Hormones: What Make Up an Individual's Sex. In M. Ah-King (Ed.), Challenging Popular Myths of Sex, Gender and Biology(pp. 23-32). Switzerland: Springer International.
* Jurmain, R., Kilgore, L., Trevathan, W., & Bartelink, E. J. (2017). Essentials of physical anthropology. Australia: Cengage Learning.
